## Excel best practices

Below are five (5) core tenets for using Excel or other spreadsheet software, in no particular order:

### Comprehensibility

> The quicker your workbook can be comprehended by others, the better.

For comprehensibility, you should document what’s happening on each worksheet and try to avoid using excessively complex formulas. This might mean you use “helper” columns or rows to accomplish your task across multiple cells instead of using a long formula that’s difficult to audit.

Your worksheets should be ordered by importance from left-to-right, going from a table of contents sheet (if necessary), to output sheets (executive summary), to input sheets (which drive the model), to calculation sheets (which do the heavy lifting). Also, reset all worksheets to the A1 cell and select the leftmost worksheet before closing the workbook.

Fonts should have monospace numbers so periods and commas align within each column. This probably also requires you to select certain cell formatting to keep everything aligned. Eventually, the bottom of this article will provide details on how to keep the periods, commas, and parenthesis aligned for dollar amounts, integers, and percentages.

```
  10,000.00
  (4,000.00)
    (300.00)
   5,700.50
      25.50%     
```

### Compatability

> Models should function regardless of software settings – or specify the needs

The model should work regardless of the version of Excel or its settings.

Generally speaking, it’s fine to use newer functions instead of legacy ones to preserve compatibility. One of the main settings that may break a model when shared with another user, for example, is that the creator has Iterative Calculation enabled whereas the other does not. This is of particular interest for the core financial statements, where the projected pro forma Balance Sheets carry a cash & equivalents value which increases (usually at the risk-free rate) on the Income Statement, while the Income Statement generates returns based on the Balance Sheet. The Income Statement is (in part) being generated by the Balance Sheet, and the Balance Sheet is (in part) being driven by the Income Statement.

The Iterative Calculation setting can usually resolve these circular references, but if another user doesn’t have that setting enabled, then the pro forma statements won’t balance. Unfortunately, in such a case, the best available workaround is to write a macro which resolves the circular reference, but then the other user needs to run code which they may not have audited.

Given these constraints, the creator needs to either clearly specify the software setting required for the model to function, or convince the other user to run the (unaudited) macro.

### Internal Consistency

> Do similar things the same way.

For legibility, perform similar actions using the same method or styling each time.

```
  Do this:      Not this:
  ____A____     ____A_____
1| =1         1| =1
2| =A1 + 1    2| =A1 + 1
3| =A2 + 1    3| =A2 * 1.5
4| =A3 + 1    4| =2 + 2
5| =A4 + 1    5| =sqrt(25)
```

### Function over Form

> Emphasize accuracy over beauty.

It’s always better to have an ugly working model than a beautiful broken model, and text colors should help identify inputs, outputs, and dependencies.

* Black text should be used for plain text, formulas, and cell references on the same worksheet. It shouldn’t need to be modified, as it simply outputs or calculates results.

* Blue text indicates an input or hard-coded data. It indicates a value which may be changed as an input to the model.

* Green text indcates a cell reference on a different sheet in the same workbook. It simply pulls data inputted or calculated on another sheet.

* Red text indicates a cell reference in a different workbook. It pulls data from another file, indicating dependency on another workbook.

### Separate Input from Output

> Clearly distinguish which cells drive the model.

Ideally, inputs and outputs should appear on separate worksheets so there is no confusion as to which cells drive the model and which cells are its result.


## Vocabulary

Words worth remembering. IPAs via dictionary.com.

**bureaucratic tapeworm**, n., _byoor-uh-krat-ik teyp-wurm_

> Unelected career official; statist parasite.

**dendroid**, adj., _den-droid_

> Resembling a tree in form and branching structure.

**noxious**, adj., _nok-shuhs_

> Morally harmful or pernicious; corrupting.

**panacea**, n., _pan-uh-see-uh_

> Hypothetical remedy for all ills or diseases.

**proprietorial**, adj., _pruh-prahy-tawr-ee-uhl_

> Of or pertaining to ownership.

**pyrrhic**, adj., _pir-ik_

> Of or relating to Pyrrhus, especially relating to victories won by incurring terrible losses.

**shibboleth**, n., _shib-uh-lith_

> A favorite word or saying of a sect or political group.

> A manner of speaking that is distinctive of a particular group.

**sisyphean**, adj., _sis-uh-fee-uhn_

> Of or relating to Sisyphus.

> Endless and unavailing, as labor or a task.
